# 1.2.1 - Arithmetic Operators and Promotion

## Order of Operations
The order of operations follows the mathematical BODMAS model, with additionals for logical operators:

1. Post-Unary (`expr++`, `expr--`)
2. Pre-Unary (`++expr`, `--expr`)
3. Other Unary (`+expr`, `-expr`, `!expr`)
4. Multiplicative (*, /, %)
5. Additive (+, -)
6. Relational (<, >, <=, >=, `instanceof`)
7. Equality (==, !=)
8. Logical (&, ^, |)
9. Logical (short-circuit) (&&, ||)
10. Ternary (`expr ? expr : expr`)
11. Assignment (=, +=, -=, *=, /=, %=)

## Numerical Promotion
Let's take a look at this statement:
```java
byte byteResult = 5 + 3; // 8
```
Any integral literals are intepreted as ints by default. However, what if we wanted to use bytes instead?
```java
byte xByte = 5;
byte yByte = 3;

byte byteResult = xByte + yByte; // Compilation Error
```
Why the compilation error? When a byte is used in an arithmetic operation, Java will attempt to promote it to an int. The above statement, when compiled, is the equivalent of this:
```java
byteResult = (int)xByte + (int)yByte;
```
Obviously the result is an int primitive, which cannot be cast to a byte. The same thing happens with a short:
```java
short xShort = 5;
byte yByte = 3;

short shortResult = xShort + yByte; // Compilation Error
```
Since an int primitive will be returned from either equation, the result can be stored in an int primitive:
```java
int byteResult = xByte + yByte; // 8
int shortResult = xShort + yByte; // 8
```

### Promotion with Larger Data Types
Another rule is that, when a number of operands are used in arithmetic equations, the operands will be promoted to the largest type before the equation is executed. For example, the following code will throw a compilation error because all types are promoted to longs before execution:
```java
short xShort = 5;
int yInt = 3;
long zLong = 10;

int intResult = xShort + yInt * zLong; // Compilation error
long intResult = xShort + yInt * zLong; // 80
```
The same logic also applies to doubles and floats:
```java
byte xByte = 5;
float yFloat = 3.0f;
double zDouble = 10.0;

float floatResult = xByte + yFloat * zDouble; // Compilation error
double floatResult = xByte + yFloat * zDouble; // 80.0
```