# 1.1 - Primitive Types and Variables

## 1.1.1 Boolean Primitives

- Conceptually, the smallest data type is the boolean (as only stores true or false, a single bit)
- Most JVMs may, however, store this as a byte instead

- Accepts two values, `true` or `false`. Both are reserved keywords:
```java
boolean flag;
flag = true;
flag = false;
```

- Booleans can only be assigned `true` or `false`. Booleans will not accept any other value, even with casting, nor can a boolean be assigned to (or cast to) any other type:
```java
flag = 1; // Invalid
flag = (boolean)1; // Invalid
int value = flag; // Invalid
int value = (int)flag; // Invalid
```

- If you need to convert a boolean to an int or other data type, use a ternery operator like so:
```java
int value = flag ? 1 : -1; // Valid
```

## 1.1.2 - Byte, Short, Int, and Long Primitives

- Byte, Short, Int, and Long are integral have no decimal value and cannot express a fraction

- Bytes are a sequence of 8 bits that can store values in the range -128 < 127:
- Bytes are useful for arrays (e.g. byte arrays)
```java
byte maxByte = 127;
byte minByte = -128;
```

- Shorts are 16 bits, double the size of the byte:
```java
short maxShort = 32767;
short minShort = -32768;
```

- Ints are twice the size of a short, 32 bits, and have a max range up to 2.1 billion:
```java
int maxInt = 2147483647;
int minInt = -2147483648;
```

- Longs are the largest integral data type, with a range of 9.2 quintrillion:
- Longs are often used to measure time in milliseconds
- Longs are appended with an `L` or `l` - this tells the compiler the value is a long, and is required for literal values
```java
long maxLong = 9223372036854775807L;
long minLong = -9223372036854775808L;
```

## 1.1.3 Float and Double Primitives

- Both floats and doubles can represent values with decimal numbers. For example:
```java
float piFloat = 3.14f;
float piDouble = 3.14;
```

- Floats will use 32 bits to store data, whereas doubles use 64 bits. This means that floats can store around 7 decimal places, and floats 15/16.
- Notice that floats require an `F` or `f` at the end of the number, similar to longs - if this is omitted, the compiler will treat the literal as a double
- Floats and doubles will both round the last digit if the literal is greater than the number of supported decimal places. For example:
```java
float piFloat = 3.141592653f
System.out.println(piFloat); // Output = 3.1415927
```

- Floats and doubles can be declared as decimal literals without a preceeding integer:
```java
float pFloat = .98768f
```

- Floats and doubles can also be assigned integer literals - unlike the integral primitives, floats and doubles will not overflow. If the value is too large, it will instead switch to scientific notation to accomodate the large number. This is true for both positive and negative values.
- Note that this can result in loss of accuracy since the original value is truncated:
```java
float longToFloat = 1111111111123343543535353553L; // Output = 1.11111113E18
double longToDouble = 1111111111123343543535353553L;
```

## 1.1.4 Char Primitives

- The Char primitive is used almost entirely to represent unicode characters, but can hold a range of integral values like short or int
- Char is made up of 16 bits like a short, but does not have the same range! It is a positive integral, with a range of 0 to 65535:
```java
char minChar = 0;
char maxChar = 65535;
```

- If used to hold character or unicode literals, each character must be enclosed in single quotes. Double quotes makes it a string
```java
char aLetter = 'A';
char aUnicode = '\u0041';
char newLine = '\n';
```

- Under the hood, characters (literal or unicode representation) are stored as integer literals. For example:
```java
char aLetter = 'A';
char aNumber = 65;
```
- This can be demonstrated with the following test:
```java
if(aLetter == aUnicode && aUnicode == aNumber) {
    System.out.println("\\u0041, \'A\', and 65 are equal");
} else {
    System.out.println("They are NOT equal");
}
```

## 1.1.5 Narrowing, Widening, and Casting

### Widening
- Smaller primitives can fit into any larger primitive - this is called **widening**.
- Remember order of size - byte -> short -> int -> long
```java
byte byteValue = 100;
short shortValue = byteValue;
int intValue = shortValue;
long longValue = intValue;
```

- This is also true for float -> double, or for integral primitive -> float/double:
```java
float floatValue = 3.141592f;
double doubleValue = floatValue;

floatValue = intValue; // 100.0
doubleValue = longValue; // 100.0
```
- As is standard for a decimal primitive, attempting to assign a number larger than the max range will result in the number being stored in scientific notation
- In practice, this means that a float or double will not overflow - but it will loose accuracy

### Narrowing and Casting
- Widening to a larger primitive makes sense, but going to opposite way - larger to smaller, or **narrowing** - doesn't. Doing it with no modifications will result in overflow and crap data:
```java
long longValue = 65634535353435634L;
int intValue = longValue; // -1
short shortValue = intValue; // -1
//etc...
```
- Instead we need to use **casting**. Casting in Java allows for relative safety when narrowing data to smaller primitives. For example:
```java
long longValue = 100L;
intValue = (int) longValue; // 100
shortValue = (short) intValue; // 100
byteValue = (byte) shortValue; // 100
doubleValue = byteValue; // 100.0
floatValue = (float) doubleValue; // 100.0f
```
- Note that casting is mostly reliable, but for vastly different types some sanity checks are best practice to include.

### Widening and Narrowing between char and short
- An interesting use case is the type conversion between `char` and `short`. Remember that they are both 16-bit primitives, but have different ranges. Since there is some overlap:
    - A **positive** short will fit into a char since the positive range of a short is less than that of the char:
    ```java
    shortValue = 100;
    char charValue = (char) shortValue; // 100
    ```
    - A **positive** char will only fit into a short if the value is less than the upper positive bound of the short (i.e. <~32000):
    ```java
    charValue = 30000;
    shortValue = (short) charValue; // 30000
    ```
    - A **negative** short will overflow when cast to a char and a char **> short range** will overflow when cast as a short. These results are unpredictable and should be avoided.

## 1.1.6 - Underscores in Numbers

- Commas can not be used in numbers since commas have reserved purposes in Java
- Underscores can be used instead of commas to format numbers:
```java
long worldPopulation = 7_640_000_000L;
```
- At compile time underscores are ignored, it is for human readibility only
- Underscores can be used in any integral number primitive as well as float/double (e.g. 3.456_6544_4554d;)
- However, you cannot use an underscore:
    - At the immediate start or end of a number (e.g. _534256, 654345_)
    - Immediately before or after the range suffix (e.g. _L)
    - Immediately before or after a decimal point
    - Immediately before or after a - sign.
    - Immediately before or after a number system prefix (discussed in 1.6)

## 1.1.7 - Alternative Number Systems

- Java supports:
    - Arabic (base-10)
    - Octal (base-8)
    - Hexadecimal (base-16)
    - Binary (base-2)
- To use difference number systems, different suffixes are used. For example:
```java
int w = 100; //base-10
int x = 0144; //base-8, starts with 0
int y = 0x0064; //base-16, starts with 0x
int z = 0b1100100; //base-2, starts with 0b
```
- The letters can be either lower or upper case, but conventionally they are kept lowercase.
- These numbers can be proven with the following code:
```java
if(w==x && x==y && y==z){
    // if true
} else {
    //if false
}
```
- These numbers can also use the underscore system discussed in 1.6, but cannot be placed before or after the prefix (e.g. 0b_)

## 1.1.8 Scientific Notation

- Scientific notation can only be used with floats or doubles
- Two components - the decimal and the exponent (e.g. 5.88 x 10^12)